---
layout: post
title: "Improving FITS Performance"
author: Jamie Little
---

Harvard's fits utility bundles a lot of file identification tools 
and allows you to run them on files easily. It's used in Samvera 
applications for file characterization. If you are importing a large
amount of content into your repository you'll be starting and stopping 
fits many times. The standard way of doing this (running fits.sh over and 
over again) isn't very efficient. 

fits includes a script that allows you to run the utility with [nailgun](http://www.martiansoftware.com/nailgun/).
nailgun is a minimal server that allows you to spin up a JVM for the Java
application and reuse it. The normal way that works is creating and destroying a
JVM instance each time the application is run. If you are starting and stopping
the JVM many thousands of times, that can be inefficient. 

nailgun has a client that is written in C and a server jar. To get the nailgun-ified version of fits running on OSX you can install the nailgun client it with brew:

`brew install nailgun`

However, you'll need to get a copy of the nailgun server jar by downloading the [nailgun source from GitHub](https://github.com/facebook/nailgun) running `mvn install`. 

You pass the `fits-ngserver.sh` script the server jar: 

```bash
./fits-ngserver.sh ~/nailgun/nailgun-server/target/nailgun-server-0.9.2-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

Then interact with fits through the nailgun client instead of using `fits.sh`: 

`~/Sync/repos/nailgun/ng edu.harvard.hul.ois.fits.Fits -i ~/Pictures/Something.jpg`

This reduces the time it takes to run fits:

With nailgun:
```
real	0m2.797s
user	0m0.001s
sys	0m0.002s
```

Running directly: 

```
real	0m5.543s
user	0m11.829s
sys	0m0.862s
```

Hyrax calls fits from a shell command, so you only need to switch out the `fits.sh` path setting in your Hyrax installation with the `ng` command. 
